# Compressed Delivery Plan

> 10/21/2019

## Introduction

This resource serves as a recommended planning guide for delivering SEC504 in a
shortened, 5-day course format.  As a recommendation, this resource should be
best interpreted by the instructor delivering the course content, and used as a
guide with final decisions regarding class hours, breaks, and material delivery
left to the instructor. 

## Class Hours

A standard SANS conference day is 6 hours of delivery, accommodating two
20-minute breaks and a 1.25-hour lunch.  In most instances in conference,
SEC504 starts at 9am and completes around 5-5:30pm during each of its 6 days
(with 6 hours of contact time per day).  The noted exception is on Day 1, which
adds an additional contact hour.  Since, in this standard format, Day 6 is
devoted to a set of “capture the flag” challenges and doesn’t present students
with new concepts, it is possible to end Day 6 earlier without sacrificing
quality.  As the result, SEC504 requires 35-37 hours of total class time.

Extending each day of a 5-day delivery plan to 7 hours of delivery provides the
necessary 35 hours of class time.  Based on the content of SEC504, this
schedule would be structured as follows, generally mimicking the standard SANS
schedule, but starting each day 1 hour earlier than at a conference:

  + Start time: 8:00 am
  + First Break: 10:00 am – 10:15 am
  + Lunch: 12:00 pm – 1:00 pm
  + Second Break: 3:00 pm – 3:15 pm
  + End time: 4:30 pm

## Material Coverage By Day

### Day 1

  + Complete Book 1 by 4pm.
  + Start Book 2 at around 4pm, devoting approximately ½ hour to the materials.
  + Remind students to bring Books 2 and 3 on the following day.

### Day 2

  + Complete Book 2 by around lunch time.
  + Start Book 3 after lunch, devoting approximately 3¼ hours to the materials.
  + Remind Students to bring Books 3 and 4 on the following day.
  + **Note: In a 5-Day format, instructors should skip the wireless lab and
    instead offer it as an out of classroom exercise for students to complete
    on their own time.**

### Day 3

  + Complete Book 3 by around lunch time.
  + Start Book 4 after lunch, devoting approximately 3¼ hours to the materials.
  + Remind students to bring Books 4 and 5 on the following day.

### Day 4

  + Complete Book 4 by about 11:15am, devoting approximately 3 hours to the
    materials.
  + **Note: In a 5-Day format, instructors should skip the Counting Resources
    to Evaluate DoS Attacks lab and instead offer it as an out of classroom
    exercise for students to complete on their own time.**
  + Start Book 5 at around 11:15am, devoting approximately 4 hours to the
    materials.
  + Remind students to bring all class materials on the following day, because
    they’ll be useful for the “capture the flag” challenge.

### Day 5

  + Complete Book 5 by around First Break.
  + Start Book 6 (“capture the flag” challenges) after First Break, devoting
    approximately 5 hours to the materials.
  + Complete Book 6 (“capture the flag” challenges) by around 4:30pm.
  + Celebrate the successful completion of the course.

## Catching Up

Many factors in the delivery of the class can lead to a delay in delivery.  If
the instructor is behind in the delivery of material, some controls are
available to catch up as described below:

  + The instructor may choose to extend the class day by 30-45 minutes as
    necessary to catch up on material delivery.  In many instances, for example
    with DoD personnel, the students are OK with starting even before 8am.
  + It is possible to gain an additional 15 minutes of class time each day by
    shortening the lunch break by 15 minutes.  The students are generally OK
    with this, and recognized the benefit of devoting more time to the course.
    This could provide extra 1.25 hours of class time if the need arises.
  + The instructor may choose to save the Covert Channels lab exercise that
    runs at the end of the book 5 material as an out of classroom exercise;
    this is typically acceptable to students since they are excited to get a lot of
    hands-on time working on the CTF.

If instructors fall far behind in the material, they should consider
eliminating demonstrations they would otherwise perform in class, sticking to
the course material.

Instructors are always free to contact Joshua Wright after hours to discuss
where he or she is in course material delivery to identify opportunities to
accelerate delivery. Josh can be reached on the SANS SEC504 Slack channel, by
email (jwright@willhackforsushi.com) or by phone/text/WhatsApp/Telegram at +1-401-524-2911.

